"Lengawo" is an international auxillary language designed to facilitate language acquisition through the systemization of knowledge.

Lengawo is inspired in part by the way that Esperanto uses a table of correlatives. Typically, most languages feature correlatives such as "who", "what", "where", "when", "why", and "how". Many languages, particularly Indo-European languages, feature some system of correlatives sharing similar phonemes, however even the most systemized correlatives feature irregularities that must be learned individually. Lengawo takes the concept of systemized correlatives and runs far with it in an effort to facilitate language acquisition. Speakers do not need to remember long lists of arbitrary words, each with limited applicability. They need only remember systems of things, united by a standardized set of suffixes to indicate things like order and cardinal direction.

Perhaps the most pervasive use of this technique in Lengawo is the numeral prefix system used for sequential information: days of the month, months of the year, seasons of the year, parts of the body, etc.. To illustrate, the suffix "-wo" (derived from PIE "oinos", cognate with English "one", Latin "unus", etc.) is the suffix used to indicate the first of a sequence of something. The suffix "-do" (derived from PIE "duwos", cognate with English "two", Latin "duo", etc.) is the suffix used to indicate the second of a sequence of something. The root word for a time of day is "hore-" (cognate with English "hour", Latin "hora", etc.). Therefore, the first part of the day, morning, is "horewo". The second part of the day, afternoon, is "horedo". And so on. Speakers of the language do not need to memorize words of arbitrary etymology like "mateno", "tarde", etc. They need only remember the systems of knowledge that underlie them.

The name "Lengawo" itself is a demonstration of this technique, meaning "language one". 

Some arbitrariness still remains when selecting the root words that indicate systems of knowledge. This arbitrariness must be reduced where possible, for a number of reasons: to facilitate language acquisition, to prevent disputes concerning language design, and to minimize accusations of linguistic bias. No language can ever completely address these issues, but we must make the best attempt to do so. A selection process must exist to decide how roots are assigned, and this selection process must be principled if possible. If the selection process is chosen correctly, the etymology of a root should be familiar to the largest number of present day speakers of any language worldwide. Familiarity can occur if a word resembles another word from a language they speak, either due to direct linguistic ancestry, or due to borrowing. In either case, we say that familiarity occurs due to existance within a "Lingua Franca", historical or otherwise, that has either resulted in many daughter languages or many borrowing events. This set of Lingua Francas should be formalized ahead of time, and there should be a formal process by which Lingua Francas are selected. On the principle of maximizing familiarity, we choose the following as our set of Lingua Francas:

* Proto-Indo-European
* Ancient Greek
* Latin
* English

Our selection process is as follows: 

* pick the first Lingua Franca on the list that features a word that would be familiar to speakers of a language below it. 
* adapt the word to work well as a root with standard suffixes, remove PIE laryngeals, and simplify spelling.

To illustrate, let's say we are choosing a word for "month". "Month" is derived from Proto-Indo-European "mehns-" ("moon"), and "mehns" is immediately intelligible in Greek ("μήν") and Latin ("mensis"), and these in turn would be familiar to English speakers through words like "moon". Therefore, "mehns-" is chosen as the etymology. Since larygeals were dropped in all modern descendants of PIE, we adapt "mehns-" as "mens-" to serve as the root for "month". Since standard suffixes all start with semivowels or consonants, we need to append a vowel to "mens-" to avoid ambiguous or unweildy words such as "mensyo", "mensso", or "menszo", and this vowel should be compatible with semivowel suffixes such as "-yo" and "-wo". Vowels that are compatible include "e", "a", or "o", and since the preceding vowel ("e") is fairly closed, we choose to append an open vowel "a", forming "mensa" as our root, and we can apply standard suffixes to derive "mensayo" ("month"), "mensawo" ("January"), "mensado" ("February"), etc.

In another example, let's say we are choosing a word for "day". "Day" is derived from Proto-Indo-European "degʷʰ-" ("day"), however this is unintelligible to Greek ("ἡμέρα"), Latin ("dies"), and English ("day"). We therefore go to the next language over. Greek ("ἡμέρα") is not intelligible to Latin or English, so we continue on to Latin ("dies"), which is similar to English ("day"), and would be familiar to English speakers through stock phrases such as "carpe diem". We therefore choose "dies" as the etymology. Root words must allow trivially appending standardize suffixes while still being easy to pronoun, so to avoid combining of too many vowels in words such as "dieyo" or "diewo", we adopt "di-" as the root word for "day", and apply standard suffixes to derive "diyo" ("day"), "diwo" ("monday"), "dido" ("tuesday"), etc.

