"Interstellar English" is a hypothetical language meant to accompany a scenario in science fiction in which humanity achieves manned interstellar travel using only near future technology, such as the laser initiated nuclear pulse engines proposed in "Project Daedalus".

The language is characterized as derivative of a pidgin language based primarily on English. To avoid having to make arbitrary decisions concerning the language, we decide the pidgin language will have the same patterns of speech found in Lesovo English, described [here](https://www.newstatesman.com/world/2017/11/full-understand-new-language-lesvos-refugee-camp), but with vocabulary defined by [Aviation English](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aviation_English) where available. The pidgin language will be set to occur in 2100, which is presumed to be far enough in the future for current commerical space companies to allow space access to people in poorly educated demographics.

The pidgin language will evolve into a creole and will then undergo different sound laws, dependant on where it is spoken in the solar system. At least two main dialects will be constructed: one for Mars, and another for the belt and outer solar system. Earth will retain its major languages, which will undergo their own sound laws, however borrowings from these languages will be negligible.

Most sound laws within dialects will have the tendency to contract prepositions and redoubled pronouns onto verbs, thereby creating inflective languages from an analytical ancestor based on English.

Our main focus will be a language spoken circa 1000 years in the future, when fuel manufature becomes proficient enough to allow the construction of generational starships. These starships will be powered by laser initiated fusion using pellets of Helium 3 and Deuterium. Their fuel is manufactured over low mass gas giants, chiefly Uranus, since doing so lowers the delta V requirements of mining operations. The first starships target habitable planets in the Alpha Centauri system, and are designed to undergo cruise phases of approximately 40 years at 10% the speed of light. Self replicating machines will have inserted into the star system many centuries prior to the conception of the project, and these machine will manufacture infrastructure for the colonists prior to their arrival. 

Property aboard the starships is bought and sold as with any other property in space, thereby relieving the need for crew. Property owners come from all over the solar system, however most residents must be affluential and well educated in order to buy property aboard the ship, so pidgin language is not expected to emerge during the cruise phase. Nevertheless, extensive word borrowing is expected to occur. It is presumed that one of the daughter languages of pidgin English will become the dominant language amongst residents and will then loan many of the words from the less common languages, though the resulting language will still be mutually intelligible to the parent language spoken within the solar system.