"Interstellar English" is a hypothetical language meant to accompany a scenario in science fiction in which humanity achieves manned interstellar travel using only near future technology, such as the laser initiated nuclear pulse engines proposed in "Project Daedalus".

The language is characterized as the derivative of a pidgin language based primarily on English. To avoid having to make arbitrary decisions concerning the language, we decide the pidgin language will have the same patterns of speech found in Lesovo English, described [here](https://www.newstatesman.com/world/2017/11/full-understand-new-language-lesvos-refugee-camp), but with vocabulary defined by [Aviation English](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aviation_English) where available. The pidgin language will be set to occur in 2100, which is presumed to be far enough in the future for current commerical space companies to provide cheap access to space to people in poorly educated demographics where pidginization is more likely to occur.

The pidgin language will evolve into a creole and will then undergo different sound laws. The sound laws applied will reflect the patterns discussed in [this video](https://youtu.be/PBz-JT00MZs?list=PLduA6tsl3gygfiWmGAhhHb4-HAqP6I63l). The sound laws that are applied will be dependant on the conditions inside the habitats that are used by the speakers of this creole. We will now discuss what some of these conditions are.

Virtually all habitats will operate at pressures that are somewhere between Earth at sea level and the minimum pressure needed to sustain human life in a pure oxygen atmosphere. Since it's not yet certain that the latter can be sustained in long term, multi-generational habitats such as O'Neill cylinders and domed cities, we will presume most such habitats will operate closer to pressures at sea level, though they may still lower pressure to a point that is known not to deter human habitation on Earth. We'll choose the air pressure of Denver as this standard, which is 85% that of Earth sea level. 

Temperature aboard orbital habitats will almost always approximate comfortable room temperature on Earth. Most forms of heat transfer do not occur in space: convection does not exist in the absence of a fluid, and conduction would only serve to transfer heat through the body of the spacecraft itself. The only form of heat transfer left is radiation, which requires there be a surface area on the craft to have a significant effect. Any space habitat that generates enough power to support human life will generate more heat than can be disappated in the absence of radiators, so orbital habitats will have to be designed so that internal temperature is comfortable enough for human occupation. If the habitat fails to dissapate heat, it will run too hot for human to occupy, even in the outer solar system. For this reason, we presume most orbital habitats will operate continuously at room temperature and will only ever deviate from it if given a good reason to do so. Surface habitats on the other hand will have to contend with conduction through the ground and (in the case of Titan) convection through the air, so they may on average be colder than orbital habitats.

Humidity will also be kept mostly at comfortable levels, however this is dependant upon dehumidifiers that remove the moisture produced from humans. In the absence of dehumidifiers, the craft can still be occupied, but will be more humid than what is comfortable and may not be comfortably inhabited for long. For these reasons, we can presume that humidity will be anywhere from comfortable to excessive, but not likely dry, and it may be a function of social demographics, such that wealthy habitats are able to better maintain dehumidifiers and therefore tend towards less humidity. Inner system orbital habitats such as O'Neill cylinders will have little reason to exist other than to provide estates for people whose income does not depend on direct access to physical resources like mining, so their residents are expected to be wealthier, and their living conditions are expected to be more comfortable. Outer system habitats are likely to be more blue collar, and their living conditions are expected to be less comfortable. 

We would expect that environments within habitats would tend to be more confined than most of the environments on which language developed on Earth, however this isn't strictly the case. O'Neill cylinders can offer many square kilometers of unsegmented habitable volume, and if temperatures inside them are kept comfortable, there is no reason why conversations could not be done at the same distances one would expect to have evolved tropical languages on Earth. It is only where humans start operating on the surface of planets that natural gravity starts to constrain the size of habitats. Megastructures such as domed cities could still be constructed on low gravity planets such as Mars, but as previously mentioned these habitats would have the tendency of running colder, so there may still be a tendency to conduct conversations in closer quarters as we see in cold climates on Earth. 

One other factor we haven't considered yet is how modern inventions such as teleconferencing will change the way we speak. Using the same model for sound laws discussed within the video, we can expect on one hand that teleconferencing may reduce the need for a language to conduct conversation at a distance. This would imply that even in large habitats languages may tend to evolve as if their environments were typically in close quarters. However teleconferencing also introduces its own unique opportunities for misinterpretation, such as if voice is muffled through static. There may be certain phonemes which are more or less likely to be perceived in these conditions, and if so one could expect sound laws to occur around these phonemes. In principle, one can conduct studies in a lab to create a "confusion matrix" representing how sound is misinterpreted when transmitted digitally, but for now there isn't enough information to make predictions based upon this observation.

So to summarize, we have outlined the following linguistic environments:
1.) **Inner System O'Neill Cylinders** wealthy, well educated speakers operating in warm, dry, wide open spaces at high pressure
2.) **Outer System Domed Cities** poor, uneducated speakers operating in cool, humid, confined spaces at low pressure
3.) **Outer System O'Neill Cylinders** poor, uneducated speakers operating in warm, humid, wide open spaces at low pressure

These conditions will drive sound laws that will eventually produce three daughter languages:
1.) highly sonorous language with relatively conserved features
2.) less sonorous language featuring implosives and ejectives
3.) highly sonorous tonal language featuring implosives and ejectives

Most sound laws within languages 1.) and 2.) will have the tendency to contract prepositions and redoubled pronouns onto verbs, thereby creating increasingly inflective languages from an analytical ancestor based on English.  

Earth will retain its major languages, which will undergo their own sound laws, however no major demographic shifts are expected so we expect features will be mostly conserved and borrowings will be negligible.

Our focus will be on a language spoken circa 1000 years in the future, when manufature of Helium 3 and Deuterium becomes proficient enough to allow the construction of generational starships. These starships will be powered by laser initiated fusion using pellets of Helium 3 and Deuterium as both fuel and propellant. Their fuel is manufactured over low mass gas giants, chiefly Uranus, since doing so lowers the delta V requirements of mining operations. The first starships target habitable planets in the Alpha Centauri system, and are designed to undergo cruise phases of approximately 40 years at 10% the speed of light. Self replicating machines will have inserted into the star system many centuries prior to the conception of the project, and these machines will manufacture infrastructure for the colonists prior to their arrival. 

Property aboard the starships is bought and sold as with any other property in space, thereby relieving the need for crew. Property owners come from all over the solar system, however most residents must be affluential and well educated in order to buy property aboard the ship, the language of the colonists will be derived chiefly from language 1.), with minor or negligible borrowings from languages 2.) and 3.). No sound laws or pidginization is expected to occur during cruise phase. 
